# Deep Learning in Computational Biology

[LLM Models - review](https://github.com/RUCAIBox/LLMSurvey)

[Single cell transformer papers - Theislab](https://github.com/theislab/single-cell-transformer-papers)

[Interpretable ML Book](https://christophm.github.io/interpretable-ml-book/)

[Graph transformer related papers](https://github.com/wehos/awesome-graph-transformer)

## Variant Calling:

[A universal SNP and small-indel variant caller using deep neural networks - DeepVariant - Poplin et al. Nat Biotech 2018](https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.4235)

    - CNN based variant calling using samtools pileup images. 
        - Optimize CNN parameters using SGD.
    - Reference and read support for each variant into RGB image.
    - Features: read base, base quality, mapping quality, strand, read supports variant, bases differ from ref allele
    - Mapped reads are preprocessed by local De-Bruijn graph based read assembly.
    - Candidate haplotypes are generated by traversing the haplotype graphs.
    - Evaluating variant calls: number of SNPs, number of indels, insertion/deletion ratio, heterozygous/homozygous non-reference ratio, and transition/transversion ratio

[Haplotype-aware variant calling with PEPPER-Margin-DeepVariant enables high accuracy in nanopore long-reads - Shafin et al. Nat Meth 2021](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34725481/)

    - Earlier version: WhatHap-DeepVariant: haplotype assembly by whatshap and followed by variant calling.
    - Latest work: PEPPER-Margin Deepvariant 
    - PEPPER-SNP: SNPs from read alignments using RNN
    - Margin: phasing and haplotyping from these SNPs and producing a haplotagged alignment file using HMM.
    - PEPPER-HP: From this haplotagged alignment file, it generates SNPs and INDEL candidate variants using RNN.
    - DeepVariant: Takes candidates from PEPPER-HP and haplotagged alignment file from margin and genotypes the proposed candidates in a haplotype-aware manner.
    - Margin: Takes output of DeepVariant and alignment file to generate a phased VCF using the same HMM.

[Improving variant calling using population data and deep learning - Chen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37173615/)

    - Population Aware DeepVariant
    - Inserts the population information, similar to the GATK Haplotypecaller -–population-callset option.
    - Feed the population allele information (allele frequency) as an additional channel / feature.

[A deep-learning-based RNA-seq germline variant caller - Cook et al. Bioinformatics Advances 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37416509/)

    - RNA-seq specific adaptation - adjusting for splicing sites and dividing reads into different segments for computational efficiency

[CancerVar- An artificial intelligence–empowered platform for clinical interpretation of somatic mutations in cancer - Li et al. Science Advances 2022](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35544644/): AI based cancer somatic mutation caller.

[Accurate proteome-wide missense variant effect prediction with AlphaMissense - Cheng et al. Science 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37733863/) AlphaMissense approach. DL based protein missense variant identification. Uses Evoformer architecture, same as alphafold2. 

[DeepConsensus improves the accuracy of sequences with a gap-aware sequence transformer - Baid et al. Nature Biotech 2022](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36050551/) 

    - Classical draft consensus sequence generation method, pbccs, uses HMM.
        - which is then input to assembly polishing methods such as PEPPER-Margin Deepvariant.
    - Proposes DeepConsensus - alignment based loss to train a gap (INDEL) aware transformer-encoder (encoder-only) for sequence correction.
    - Utilized for PACBIO long-read HiFi (>10Kb) Sequencing read alignment and minimizing alignment errors. 
    - Uses PacBio circular consensus sequencing (ccs) reads as an input to DL model.

[The landscape of tolerated genetic variation in humans and primates - Gao et al. Science 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37262156/) primateAI-3D model. Deep learning model based database of 4.3 million benign missense variants across the primate lineage.

[Rare penetrant mutations confer severe risk of common diseases - Fiziev et al. Science 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37262146/) Using their previusly published primateAI-3D model which identifies benign and pathogenic variants, including rare variants (MAF >= 0.1%), they identify the gene-phenotype associations and compare with the conventional GWAS studies which only include common variants.
They benchmark with another rare variant specific method Backman et al. Nature 2021, and finds more GWAS supported genes. Also derives one polygenic risk score (PRS) prediction method using the rare variants and compare with the conventional PRS prediction methods employing common variants.

## QTL / SNP / GWAS / PRS etc.

[The construction of cross-population polygenic risk scores using transfer learning - TL-PRS: Zhao et al. AJHG 2022](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36240765/) 

    - Constructing cross-population polgenic risk scores using transfer learning 
        - actually not NN based but loss function optimization using Gradient Descent method.
    - Fine tunes baseline model pre-trained with GWAS summary statistics from an ancestry group of large sample size to a small target ancestry group.
    - Uses PRS computed from existing PRS methods like Lsum, PRS-CS.
    - Uses effect size of the baseline model as initial values, iterates gradient descent algorithm to adapt the effect sizes for the target ancestry group.
    - Supports PRS computed from multiple population summary statistics.

[Deep learning predicts the impact of regulatory variants on cell-type-specific enhancers in the brain - Zheng et al. Bioinformatics Advances 2023](https://academic.oup.com/bioinformaticsadvances/article/3/1/vbad002/6986158) 

    - Predicts cell specific enhancers by first using DeepSEA framework followed by fine-tuning using RESNET. 
    - Then uses GRAD-CAM framework to obtain nucleotide importance score profiles. 
    - Augments with 6-mer based motif scoring and also employs TFmotifDisco to get the nucleotide importance scores. 
    - These scores are used to characterize the cell specific enhancers, 
        - then fine-mapped GWAS SNPs are overlapped with them to predict the putative functional and cell-specific variants.
    - *To Do:* How knowledge of these cell-specific enhancers can be used to predict cell-specific gene expression?

[Annotating functional effects of non-coding variants in neuropsychiatric cell types by deep transfer learning - MetaChrom - Lai et al. PLOS Comp Biol. 2022](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35576194/) 

    - Although the title is about annotating functional variants, the approach is similar to the DeepSEA framework. 
    - It predicts the epigenomic tracks (histone and chromatin accessibility) from DNA sequences. 
    - Uses RESNET architecture and transfer learning to predict the epigenomic tracks.

[DeepCOMBI: explainable artificial intelligence for the analysis and discovery in genome-wide association studies - Mieth et al. NAR Genomics Bioinformatics](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34296082/) 

    - Adopts layer-wise relevance propagation (LRP) to attribute SNP relevance scores and selection of significant SNPs in GWAS studies. 
    - Replaces conventional p-value thresholding. 
    - Extends their earlier work COMBI which uses SVM based method, to a DNN setting.

[REGLE - Unsupervised representation learning improves genomic discovery for lung function and respiratory disease prediction - Yun et al. medRxiv 2023](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.04.28.23289285v1) 

    - From Google Research. 
    - Proposes low dimensional representation learning of high-dimensional clinical data (HDCD)
        - utilizes these low-dimensional embeddings to compute polygenic risk scores (PRS). 
    - Applies on COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) and spirograms, lung and respiratory data.

[Genetic association studies using disease liabilities from deep neural networks - Yang et al. medRxiv 2023](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.01.18.23284383v1) 

    - Also talks about HDCD. 
    - First, they introduce GWAX, GWA using proxy. 
        - Includes persons as cases whose one of the family members has the disease of interest. 
        - Modification of CC GWAS study. 
        - Shown to retrive new GWAS risk loci. 
    - Performs AI based modeling (their pre-trained DL framework POPDx) on the input HDCD GWAS trait, 
        - generated GWAS trait features are known as disease liability scores, which are used as the GWAS trait features. 
        - They show that these liability scores perform better in GWAS trait mapping.

[EMS - Leveraging supervised learning for functionally informed fine-mapping of cis-eQTLs identifies an additional 20,913 putative causal eQTLs - Wang et al. Nat Comm 2021](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-23134-8) 

    - Work from David Kelley, Hillary Finucane etc. 
    - Presents EMS (expression modifier score) to predict fine-mapped causal variants. 
    - Trains data using fine-mapped variants derived by SUSIE + FINEMAP, using 49 tissues GTEX v8 data. 
    - Then uses annotation features like TSS distance, tissue and non-tissue specific binary annotations, DL features (Basenji scores), and trains a random forest classifier. 
    - Feature importance scores mention that Basenji scores and TSS distance are informative features. 
    - Using these EMS scores as prior, then they define a functional annotation based fine-mapping (PIP) across 95 traits.  
    - ** To Do**: check Enformer performance. See the detailed feature list. Use motif binding information. 

## Prediction of Regulatory region / gene expression using DNA sequence

[Predicting effects of noncoding variants with deep learning-based sequence model - Zhou et al. Nature Methods 2015](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26301843/) 

    - DEEPSEA deep learning framework. 
    - *Input*: DNA Sequence. 200 bp length sequences with at least one TF binding events from 919 chromatin features. 
        - Each such 200 bp sequence is used as the center to generate 1000 bp sequence with (1X919) label vector 
            - (one label for each chromatin feature and TF binding event). 
    - *Output*: 
        - 1. Predict DNAse-seq and TF binding from sequence. Allele-specific TF binding and chromatin activity. 
        - 2. Implements in-silico mutagenesis approach for variant effect prediction, used in Enformer.
        - 3. Validates functional SNPs using: 
            - Human Gene Mutation Database, 
            - GRASP (Genome-Wide Repository of Associations between SNPs and Phenotypes) database 
            - GWAS catalog. 
        
[Whole-genome deep-learning analysis identifies contribution of noncoding mutations to autism risk - Zhou et al. Nat Genet 2019](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31133750/) 

    - Follow up work of DEEPSEA.
    - Finding non-coding mutations relevant to ASD. 
    - *Input*: WGS data from Simons Simplex Collection. 
    - *Output*: 
        - 1. Categorized variants based on predicted DNA transcriptional impact or RNA binding protein impact 
        - 2. Putative functional noncoding mutations in ASD. 
        - 3. Underlying genes and pathways related to functional noncoding mutations by developing network neighborhood diferential enrichment analysis (NDEA).

[Basset - learning the regulatory code of the accessible genome with deep convolutional neural networks - Kelley et al. Genome Research 2016](https://genome.cshlp.org/content/26/7/990.long): 

    - *Input*: DNA sequence. Uses DNase-seq, DHS and peaks. 
    - *Output*: 
        - 1. CNN based prediction of chromatin accessibility and TF motifs 
        - 2. Predicts important GWAS SNPs by calculating the allele-specific differential chromatin accessibility 
            - (SNP accessibility difference or SAD). 
        - 3. In silico mutagenesis to find allele-specific changes of chomatin accessibility. 
    - *Method*: 
        - Deep CNNs learn relevant sequence motifs and regulatory logic. 
        - Assigns GWAS variants and cell-type-scores to predict chromatin accessibility difference between alleles, and predicts causal SNPs. 
        - Tests with PICS fine-mapped GWAS SNPs. 

[Sequential regulatory activity prediction across chromosomes with convolutional neural networks - Basenji - Kelley et al. Genome Research 2018](https://genome.cshlp.org/content/28/5/739.long): 

    - Basenji method. Extends Basset, which only generates peak based chromatin profiles. 
    - *Input*: DNA sequence, epigenomic data (ChIP-seq, DNAse seq, ATAC-seq)
    - *Output*:
        - 1. Cell type specific epigenomic and transcriptional profile.
        - 2. Saliency map to identify distal regulatory elements and their effect on gene expression.
        - 3. For a given SNP-gene pair, SNP expression difference (SED) score 
            - difference of predicted CAGE coverage at that gene's TSS for two alleles.
        - 4. SED-LD score: Signed LD profile of SED scores - tagged SNP scores correlate with eQTL chi-square statistics.
    - **Implementation details** : 
        - 1) 128 bp sequence bins, processed by custom aligner supporting multi-mapping reads and to normalize for GC bias. 
        - 2) Dilated CNN specific prediction.
        - 2) GPyOpt python package is used for Bayesian optimization and hyperparameter tuning. 

[Deep learning sequence-based ab initio prediction of variant effects on expression and disease risk - Expecto - Zhou et al. Nat Genet 2018](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30013180/) 

    - Deep learning framework to predict gene expression from epigenomic tracks. 
    - Uses 2002 tracks across 218 cell types, 40 Kb (20 kb in each direction) sequence from TSS,  
        - applies 200 bp sldiding window for constructing the epigenomic features. 
    - Then applies spatial operation (basically averaging) to generate 10 features per track (2002 X 10 feature matrix) 
    - predicts the tissue-specific gene expression using L2 regularized linear regression models fitted by a gradient boosting algorithm.

[Effective gene expression prediction from sequence by integrating long-range interactions - Enformer - Avsec et al. Nature Methods 2021](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34608324/) 

    - predicts gene expression from DNA sequences using transformer model and 198 bp receptive field around TSS. 
    - Best performing model so far. Beats earlier models Expecto, Basenji2. 
    - It also predicts signed effect of variants (or sequences) to check whether corresponding segment is either enhancer or repressor. 
    - Predicts the allele-specific changes in gene expression, motifs and variants. 
    - Also predicts the effect of distal regulatory enhancers (saliency score). 
    - Future work: 
        - 1) use the enformer derived scores and functional validations to fine-map the GWAS variants (similar to EMS), 
        - 2) Benchmark / use the enhancer prioritization with respect to conventional Hi-C, HiChIP maps.

[BERT-Promoter: An improved sequence-based predictor of DNA promoter using BERT pre-trained model and SHAP feature selection - Le et al. Comp Biol Chem 2022](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35863177/)

    - *Input* DNA sequence
    - *Output* Detection of promoter sequence
    - *Method* BERT model applied on DNA sequence - SHAP value specific top features are applied to ML models.

[Predicting RNA-seq coverage from DNA sequence as a unifying model of gene regulation - Linder et al. bioRxiv 2023](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.08.30.555582v1) 

    - Borzoi method. Extension of Enformer. 
    - *Input*: RNA Sequence. 
    - *Output*: 
        - 1. Predicted RNA coverage 
        - 2. Gene expression (TSS pr exon specific) 
        - 3. Enhancer prioritization by saliency score 
        - 4. QTL variant effect 
    - *Method*: 
        - Transformer + CNN + U-Net architecture 
            - (to apply attention at 128bp but predict RNA-seq coverage at 32bp, by repeated upsampling technique employed in image processing). 

[Deep learning predicts DNA methylation regulatory variants in the human brain and elucidates the genetics of psychiatric disorders - INTERACT - Zhou et al. PNAS 2022](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35969790/) 

    - Predicts DNA methylation levels from DNA sequences, tissue specific DNA methylation data, TF motifs (validated by TOMTOM motif analysis tool) 
    - also predicts DNA methylation QTLs (sequence variants) which are further integrated to brain GWAS studies. 
    - Presents a transformer based learning model to predict the changes in DNA methylation level from variants (mQTLs). 
    - Trains the data on SUSIE-derived fine-mapped mQTLs.

[CoRE-ATAC: A deep learning model for the functional classification of regulatory elements from single cell and bulk ATAC-seq data - Thibodeau et al. Plos Comp Biol 2020](https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009670) 

    - Prediction of *cis*-CREs using ATAC-seq data. 
    - Uses CNN + max pooling. 
    - Can not predict chromHMM annotations but predicts top 3 functional annotations.
  
[BindSpace decodes transcription factor binding signals by large-scale sequence embedding - Yuan et al. Nature Methods 2019](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31406384/) 

    - *Input* DNA sequences and TF labels (provided in HT-SELEX TF database)
    - *Output* Predicts TF binding motifs using StarSpace framework (a NLP based model). 
        - Learns embedding space where TFs with similar binding profiles are closer. 
        - Uses one-vs-all LASSO framework on the TF k-mers as used in StarSpace.

[Technical Note on Transcription Factor Motif Discovery from Importance Scores (TF-MoDISco) version 0.5.6.5 - Shrikumar et al. arXiv 2018](https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.00416) 

    - Using DeepLIFT framework, designs TF-MoDISCO, a motif discovery framework using the per-base importance score. 

[Base-resolution models of transcription-factor binding reveal soft motif syntax - BPNet method - Avsec et al. Nature Genetics 2021](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33603233/) 

    - *Input* ChIP-Nexus / ChIP-seq profile and sequence information (DNA binding profiles) 
    - *Output* CNN based prediction of TF binding motif information. Does not require peak caller and motif finding methods (such as MEME).
        - Learns motif syntax promoting TF cooperativity, and test how the distance between motif pairs affects TF cooperativity.
    - *Method*
        - Uses TF-MoDisco and DeepLIFT to understand the base-level contributions to motif scores (or predicted TF binding outputs). 
    
    - 
    - Developed a new motif representation called contribution weight matrix (CWM) and also compared with the traditional position frequency matrix (PFM) representation. 
    - Validates the motifs by performing targeted point-mutations in mapped motifs and comparing the observed changes in ChIP-Nexus profiles to those predicted by BPNet.

[Short tandem repeats bind transcription factors to tune eukaryotic gene expression - Horton et al. Science 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37733848/) 

    - Application of BPNet, to get the scores of STRs (short tandem repeats - 1-6 bp) and predict their influence on TF binding.

[DeepSTARR predicts enhancer activity from DNA sequence and enables the de novo design of synthetic enhancers - Almeida et al. Nature Genetics 2022](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35551305/) 

    - DeepSTARR method. 
    - Predicts chromatin regulatory activity from DNA sequence (STARR-seq). 
    - Adapts Basset architecture (CNN). 
    - Applies on Drosophilla Genome and also human genome. 
    - Identifies the motif syntax specific rules to detect the cis-regulatory code by adapting DeepLIFT and TF-MoDisco.

[Current sequence-based models capture gene expression determinants in promoters but mostly ignore distal enhancers - Review paper: Karollus et al. Genome Biology 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36973806/) 

    - Reviews the sequence to expression prediction model, particularly Enfomer, using deep learning, 
    - concludes that these prediction models mostly do not consider distal enhancers for gene regulation.

[Benchmarking of deep neural networks for predicting personal gene expression from DNA sequence highlights shortcomings - Sasse et al. Nature Genetics 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38036778/) 

    - *Input* WGS + gene expression from 839 ROSMAP individuals. 
        - Applies Enformer on the personalized reference genome constructed from WGS data.
    - *Output* 
        - ISM between allele-specific difference of gene expression, and correlation with eQTLs.
        - Prediction accuracy of gene expression for Enformer is actually lower than PrediXcan 
            - which uses SNVs from individuals to reconstruct individual level gene expression.
            - Requires variants to be present in the training data.
        - Locus specific examples: Enformer predicted gene expression anticorrelated with true genotype-dependent gene expression. 
            - SLDP profile of the candidate SNVs contradict with true effect (or predicted by PrediXcan)
        - Current sequence specific DL models mainly predict gene expression from genomic DNA close to TSS.
        - In fact, tests a custom DNA sequence specific CNN model and finds anticorrelation with true gene expression trend
            - using ISM and gradient-input - feature attribution methods.
    - *Method*
        - Enformer output track predictions are fine tuned by elastic net model.
        - Custom sequence CNN model uses 40 Kb sequence surrounding TSS.
    - *To Do*
        - Train using paired WGS + gene expression training data
        - Interpersonal variation - use long range interactions (while cell-specific variation can be modeled by promoter logic)
        - Account for post transcriptional RNA processing (RNA-protein and RNA-RNA interactions)
    
[Personal transcriptome variation is poorly explained by current genomic deep learning models - Huang et al. Nature Genetics 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38036790/) 

    - Similar observation.
    - tests on GEUVADIS RNA-seq cohort 
    - shows that prediXcan predicts much better individual-specific gene expression variation compared to the DL methods like Enformer, Basenji2, Expecto, etc.

[Deep learning suggests that gene expression is encoded in all parts of a co-evolving interacting gene regulatory structure - Zrimec et al. Nat Comm 2020](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33262328/) 

    - mentions that gene expression can be predicted by using both coding and non-coding regions, 
    - deep learning helps to identify candidate motif regions. 
    - Motif co-occurrence helps to decode the gene expression.

[CodonBERT: Large Language Models for mRNA design and optimization - Li et al. bioRxiv 2023](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.09.09.556981v1) 

    - Deep learning (BERT) model to predict the mRNA expression from codon occurrence, and codon usage bias. 
    - Uses mRNA sequence, masked sequence representation.

[Chromatin interaction-aware gene regulatory modeling with graph attention networks - Karbalayghareh et al. Genome Research 2022](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35396274/) 

    - GraphReg method. Developed from HiCDC+ group. 
    - Proposes 2 models to predict gene expression from epigenomic data: 
        - 1) Epi-GraphReg - uses both epigenomic 1D annotations + 3D interactions (HiC, HiChIP) to predict gene expression. 
            - Also optionally predicts 1D tracks (methylation, acetylation). 
        - 2) Seq-GraphReg: Uses DNA sequence. 
        - Uses GAT (Graph Attention Network) instead of GCN for modeling chromatin interactions.

[CREaTor: zero-shot cis-regulatory pattern modeling with attention mechanisms - Li et al. Genome Biology 2023](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-023-03103-8) 

    - CREATOR method. 
    - Uses CREs from ENCODE for multiple human cell types (DNA sequences) and applies transformer-based model to predict gene expression. 
    - Uses K562 with test chromosomes 8, 9 for performance evaluation. 
    - Also uses the attention scores to predict the regulatory importance of CREs (up to 2 Mb from TSS). 
    - benchmarks with the reference CRISPR datasets as well (such as Gasperini, Fulco et al.) 
    - also evaluates the importance of CREs up to 2 Mb by testing with different models where CREs are within 500 Kb, 1 Mb, 2 Mb etc. 
    - * They use RNA-seq data to model the gene expression - use sum of transcript TPM with log1p transformation as the input gene expression *.

[scBasset: sequence-based modeling of single-cell ATAC-seq using convolutional neural networks - Han Yuan et al. Nature Methods 2022](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35941239/) 

    - Single cell ATAC-seq track inference and TF binding signature from DNA sequence, using CNN.

## Prediction of Regulatory region without using DNA sequence 

[ATACworks - Lal et al. Nature Comm 2021](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-21765-5) 

    - Denoising ATAC-seq data and peak calling. 
    - Does not use DNA sequence but rather employs coverage around individual base pairs (6 Kb region). 
    - Performs denoising and peak calling. 
    - Uses ResNet architecture.

## Regulatory Networks

[BIONIC: biological network integration using convolutions - Forster et al. Nat Meth 2022](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-022-01616-x) 

    - Biological network integration. Uses GAT. 
    - **Note** : Modifies GAT to consider a priori network edge weights (Methods, eqs. 1-2). 
    - Uses 3 GAT layers, 10 attention heads per GAT encoder, each with a hidden dimension of 68, as per their hyperparameter optimization results. 
    - Uses static attention. After Exp() function, multiplies the numerator with the edge weights, and then row normalizes. 
    - The network specific node features are then combined by a weighted stochastically masked attention.

[Transfer learning enables predictions in network biology - Theodoris et al. Nature 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37258680/) 

    - Presents Geneformer - a transfer learning based method for gene regulatory network inference and predicting network dynamics.
    - *Input*: The training is performed on a huge single cell transcriptomic dataset collection Genecorpus-30M.
    - *Output*: Pre-trained model predicting dosage-sensitive disease genes and their downstream target genes through a context-aware in-silico deletion approach.
    - *Method:*    
        - The gene expression is transformed into a ranking based measure (rank-value encodings)
        - Ranking genes by (expression within that cell / expression across entire Genecorpus-30M)
        - to prioritize the cell-specific expressed genes and deprioritize the ubiquitous expressed housekeeping genes.
        - The rank value encodings were tokenized and stored by HuggingFace transformer library.
    - Training: masked learning by masking 15% genes
        - Predicting which gene should be in each masked position using the context of the remaining unmasked genes.
    - Gene embedding: 256 dimensional space + context awareness. Cell embedding: embedding of genes expressed in that cell.
    - *Applications*:
        - Fine-tuning this model on a specific disease and related few datasets accurately predicts the disease-specific target genes / dosage sensitive genes.
        - Predicting bivalent promoters vs unmethylated promoters.
        - Fine-tuning to distinguish long vs short distance TFs regulating gene expression.
        - Geneformer's cell embeddings and clustering is also shown to remove batch effects, and performs cell type annotations.
        - Using the network architecture and in-silico treatment, we can reveal candidate therapeutic targets.

[Biologically informed deep learning to query gene programs in single-cell atlases - Lotfollahi et al. Nature Cell Biology 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36732632/) 

    - Explainable Programmable Mapper (expiMap) method. Biologically interpretable DL method for single cell reference mapping
        - (mapping query dataset to a set of reference single cell atlas)
    - Identifies gene programs (GP) to contextualize the query data and better integration with reference data. 
        - These GPs are responsible / differential between conditions. 
    - Single cell atlases (with gene expression and biological conditions).     
    - Constructing gene programs for a collection of data is performed by fine-tuning and architectural surgery, similar to the scArches method.

## Single cell embedding + downstream analysis

[scGPT: toward building a foundation model for single-cell multi-omics using generative AI - Cao et al. Nature Methods 2024](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-024-02201-0) 

    - scGPT method. GPT model for single cell embedding and downstream applications 
        - (fine tuned for clustering, batch correction, cell annotation, GRN inference, Perturbation response modeling).
    - *Input*: Single cell (33M cells)
    - *Methodology*:
        - Gene representation by tokens (gene name vocabulary + special characters)
        - Gene expression values are applied *value binning* technique (after normalization) to convert into relative values. Usually M HVGs are used for embedding.
            - (to create gene tokens and solve scaling issues from different batches / experiments)
            - Sequence of M embedding vectors in transformer architecture (context information) captures relationship between genes.
        - External tokens are used to store meta information.

[GenePT- A Simple But Effective Foundation Model for Genes and Cells Built From ChatGPT - Chen et al. bioRxiv 2024](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.10.16.562533v2)

    - GenePT method for scRNA-seq embedding and downstream analysis.
    - Uses genes from Geneformer and scGPT.
    - ChatGPT text description of genes are used to create the gene embeddings (GPT-3.5).
    - Also tested gene summary embeddings from BioLinkBert, and gene expression derived embeddings such as Gene2vec, Geneformer.
    - Cell embeddings are created by weighted combination of gene embeddings
      - Approach 1: GenePT-W (weighted): 
        - Weights are derived by scRNA-seq normalized gene expression
        - Normalized embeddings by unit L2 norm.
      - Approach 2: GenePT-S (sentence): 
        - Perform sentence embedding, by creating a sequence of gene names.
        - Sequence is created by decreasing normalized expression levels, omitting genes with 0 counts. 
        - This sentence representation is then applied to GPT 3.5 to create gene embeddings.
    - Benchmarking gene embeddings: 
      - predicting gene functionality and subtypes, predicting gene-gene and protein-protein interactions, from the derived gene embeddings.
    - Benchmarking cell embeddings: 
      - Clustering metrics - AMI, ARI, ASW - GenePT-W and scGPT perform better than GeneFormer

[Cell2Sentence: Teaching Large Language Models the Language of Biology - Levine et al. bioRxiv 2024](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.09.11.557287v3) 

    - Genes are ranked by log transformation of expression.
    - Ranked list of gene names are the embeddings per cell, fed into LLM.
    - The inference from LLM is also a ranked list of gene names.
      - They are converted to expression values using a pre-trained regression between rank and gene expression.
    - This list of gene expression is used for downstream analysis such as clustering.


## Drug target prediction / disease-specific analysis

[Interpretable deep learning translation of GWAS and multi-omics findings to identify pathobiology and drug repurposing in Alzheimer's disease - NETTAG - Xu et al. Cell Reports 2022](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36450252/) 

    - Network topology based DL model to predict Alzheimer's disease (AD) risk genes. 
    - Integrates mutli-omics information - PPIs, QTLs, TFs, ENCODE, GWAS, GTEx, GO. 
        - Whereas methods like WGCNA, MEGENA, RWR do not account for multi-omic profiles.
    - Utilizes PPI + GO to prioritize putative AD risk genes, and assigns scores based on their regulatory information (QTLs, ENCODE, etc).
    - Steps:
        - 1. Cluster PPIs into multiple functional network modules.
        - 2. Characterize these modules by linking its nodes (genes) with protein annotations from GO database.
        - 3. Quantify node (gene) score by integrating its functional similarity with each gene identified by brain-specific gene regulatory evidences.
            - Prioritized genes by high aggregated gene regulatory feature score.
        - 4. Evaluate network proximities between AD-risk genes and known drug targets.

[Identifying common transcriptome signatures of cancer by interpreting deep learning models - Jha et al. Genome Biology 2022](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35581644/) 

    - The authors observed that DEGs between normal and cancer patients do not overlap between multiple datasets. 
    - So they used the expressions of protein-coding genes, lncRNA, and splicing junctions in an interpretable deep-learning model.

[Biologically informed deep neural network for prostate cancer discovery - Elmarakeby et al. Nature 2021](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34552244/) 

    - Proposed an interpretable DL model (named P-NET) using DEEPLIFT framework to understand the molecular mechanisms of cancer. 
    - The input is genes, pathways, and biological processes (molecular profile). 
    - Their relationships are prior known and downloaded from Reactome pathway datasets (https://reactome.org/). 
    - These relationships are provided as the edges in the neural network architecture.

[Genome-wide mapping of somatic mutation rates uncovers drivers of cancer - Dig - Sherman et al. Nat Biotech 2022](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35726091/) 

    - Dig method. Developed by PCAWG consortium
    - Creates a list of genome-wide neutral somatic mutation maps using a DL model 
        - (CNN for dimensionality reduction, feature selection, variant detection + Gaussian process modeling) 
    - Supports multiple types of SNV. 
    - Develops a positive selection test to detect the potential cancer driver somatic mutations. *To read in detail*

[Discovery of drug-omics associations in type 2 diabetes with generative deep-learning models - MOVE - Allesoe et al. Nat Biotech 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36593394/) 

    - Defines MOVE - Multi-omics variational autoencoder. 
    - Data from multiple omics from 789 sample cohort (vertical integration) and applies VAE 
    - Defines the association between T2D with the latent space features. 
    - Significance is computed by t-test, and by feature purturbation (0/1) technique.
