# Cancer

## Circulating tumor DNA and Minimal residual disease (MRD)

#### 2023

[Review: Moser et al. Trends in Genetics 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36792446/) Reviews ctDNA and MRD detection methods, various sequencing and methylation techniques, and particularly ML-based techniques.

[Maansson et al. Mol Oncol. 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36825535/) Uses H3K36me3 cfChIP and gene expression (generated by CAPP-seq using cfChIP) to show that cfChIP and gene expression are correlated, cfChIP identifies DEGs, and EGFR (or any other mutated genes) are enriched in H3K36me3 cfChIP-seq.

[Review: Johnston et al. Frontiers in Oncology 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37081990/) Discusses fragment features from circulating cell-free DNA (ccfDNA): fragment lengths, fragment end sequence alterations, altered nucleosome positioning, fragmentation patterns downstream of TSS, read depth coverage, nucleosome spacing footprints around DNAse-I hypersensitive sites, nucleosome linker DNA lengths, etc.

[HIFI - Li et al. EBioMedicine 2023](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37027928/) Feature-based ML to detect MRD from lung cancer (LC). Considers WGS data and generates motifs (4-mers), bin count (modified feature counts), length of insertion fragments, short/long fragments, and methylated haplotype diversity (MHD) by considering the number of methylated reads per haplotype (reference haplotype information for methylation data was obtained from TCGA), co-methylation statistics and differentially methylated region, etc. SVM was used as the classifier.

## Somatic mutations, CNVs, Loops, Chromatin organization

[Candidate Cancer Driver Mutations in Distal Regulatory Elements and Long-Range Chromatin Interaction Networks, Zhu et al. Mol Cell 2020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2019.12.027) Presents ActiveDriverWGS, to identify the mutations and corresponding regulatory regions enriched (more mutated) compared to the background mutation model, using a Poisson regression.

[A pan-cancer compendium of chromosomal instability - Drews et al. Nature 2022](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35705807/) Defines 17 mutational signatures of chromosomal instability (CIN), an umbrella term used to define all sorts of chromosomal rearrangements. Applies mixture modeling to define distinct mixture components, and probabilistically assigns copy number events to these components. Bayesian NMF is used to identify the copy number signatures. The input feature set: 5 types of mutational signatures, 14 molecular features, 11 DNA repair specific features.

